# Supplementary Figures

This folder contains the `Supplementary_figures.py` script, which generates supplementary figures.


## Inputs

The script accepts the following inputs:

1. **`different_iterations_file`**:  
   A file with 6 columns:
   - **Column 1**: Nucleosome configuration information.
   - **Column 2**: F1 scores of the SAUNA peak caller.
   - **Column 3**: F1 scores of the SAUNA3 (SAUNA with no input) peak caller with the regular number of iterations.
   - **Column 4**: F1 scores of SAUNA3 with 10x the regular number of iterations.
   - **Column 5**: F1 scores of SAUNA3 with 100x the regular number of iterations.
   - **Column 6**: F1 scores of SAUNA3 with 1000x the regular number of iterations.

2. **`different_peak_callers_file`**:  
   A file with 6 columns:
   - **Column 1**: Nucleosome configuration information.
   - **Column 2**: F1 scores of MaxFinder.
   - **Column 3**: F1 scores of the Snyder peak caller.
   - **Column 4**: F1 scores of SAUNA.
   - **Column 5**: F1 scores of SAUNA2 (SAUNA with Snyder input).
   - **Column 6**: F1 scores of SAUNA3.

3. **`F1_score_file`**:  
   A file with 6 columns:
   - **Column 1**: Annealing steps.
   - **Column 2**: Mean F1 score for the annealing step for regularly spaced nucleosomes.
   - **Column 3**: Mean F1 score for regularly spaced nucleosomes with phase-shifted nucleosomes.
   - **Column 4**: Mean F1 score for random nucleosomes.
   - **Column 5**: Mean F1 score for regularly spaced nucleosomes with random ones.
   - **Column 6**: Mean F1 score for regularly spaced nucleosomes with random where some of the regular nucleosomes were removed.

4. **`output_dir`**:  
   The path to the output directory where the generated figures will be saved.

## Input Generation

- The **`different_iterations_file`** is generated by running the `data_simulation.py` script 5 times, creating simulated data for all 5 types of nucleosome configurations each time. The different peak callers (SAUNA, SAUNA3 with the regular number of iterations, SAUNA3 with 10x the number of iterations, etc.) are then run on the simulated data. The F1 scores are calculated for the results and then stored in a TSV file where each row corresponds to the results for one dataset, totaling 25 rows. The columns are structured as described above.

- The **`different_peak_callers_file`** is created by running the `data_simulation.py` script 1000 times, generating a simulated dataset for all 5 types nucleosome configurations each time. The different peak callers (MaxFinder, Snyder, SAUNA, SAUNA2, SAUNA3) are run on every dataset. The F1 scores are calculated for the results and stored in a TSV file. Each row corresponds to a dataset, totaling 5000 rows. The columns are structured as described above.

- The **`F1_score_file`** is generated in the same manner as for the `F1_scores_over_time.py` script, but here all 5 nucleosome configuration scenarios are included. Additionally, the annealing steps are stored during the simulation and saved as a TSV. They are added as the first column of the `F1_score_file`.

## Usage

To run the script, use the following command:

```shell
python Supplementary_figures.py <different_iterations_file> <different_peak_callers_file> <F1_score_file> <output_dir>
```
